# FiniteFieldCollatz

I was wondering what an equivalent of the Collatz conjecture might be for finite fields. In a Collatz sequence a number is moved down within a set $\{2^k n : k \in \mathbb{Z}^* \}$ for some odd $n$ or jumped to another such set via $n \mapsto 3n+1$. The analogy of the sets $\{2^k n \}$ in $F_p$ are the cosets of the cyclic subgroup $\langle 2 \rangle$ of $F_p^\times$ generated by $2$. The analogy of the operation $n \mapsto 3n+1$ would be some operation that maps one such coset to another.

I came up with the following two conjectures, the first and stronger of which I've disproved by counterexamples. Before going into the details, my question is:

- Are these conjectures:
    * a) trivially true or false
    * b) proven to be true or false, and if I had used better search keywords I would have found this
    * c) interesting and yet to be provable either way
    * d) yet to be proven either way, because completely uninteresting

**Strong conjecture** For every prime $p > 3$, the cosets of $\langle 2 \rangle$ in $F_p^\times$ are traversed (in some order, with repetitions allowed) by an arithmetic progression $k_{n+1} = 3 k_{n} + 1$.

*One subtlety is that the progression can go through the fake ''coset'' $\{0\}$, and then end up in $\langle 2 \rangle$ in the next step. I'm allowing this for now.*

Very frequently (a little less than half the time for primes under 40k) the conjecture is trivial because 2 is a generator of $F_p^\times$. A nontrivial example is $p = 8233$, for which one such progression is

$$29, 88, 265, 796, 2389, 7168,...$$

which traverses the four cosets of $F_{8233}^\times / \langle 2 \rangle$ (88 and 265 belong to the same coset, as do 2389 and 7168 which both belong to $\langle 2 \rangle$ itself).

The conjecture is false. Directly testing all primes $p \leq 48871$, I found a handful of exceptions, for $p = 683$, $6553$, $8191$, and $34511$. These appear to be cases where the rank of $F_p^\times/\langle 2 \rangle$ is unusually high: 31, 56, 630, and 58, respectively. Relaxing  the conjecture to allow multiple arithmetic progressions that terminate in $\langle 2 \rangle$ and together cover all the cosets, 8191 appears to remain an exception (barring coding mistakes on my part). I found no connections to $\langle 2 \rangle$ by an arithmetic progression for two cosets: $1171 \langle 2 \rangle$ and $2775 \langle 2 \rangle$.

I'll test higher primes if I can write more efficient code.

In the weaker conjecture the sequence is not required to be a direct arithmetic progression. Instead there must be a way to traverse the cosets by repeatedly going from some element $g$ in a coset $n \langle 2 \rangle>$ to another $3g+1$ in the next (not necessarily distinct) coset $n' \langle 2 \rangle$:

**Weak conjecture** For every prime $p$, consider a directed graph where each node represents the cosets of $g \langle 2 \rangle$ of $\langle 2 \rangle$ in $F_p^\times$ and each pair of nodes corresponding to cosets $A$ and $B$ is connected exactly when there exists some $g \in A$ such that $3g+1 \in B$. The conjecture is that the graph is strongly connected, or that there is a directed path from each coset to $\langle 2 \rangle$.

I have not yet tested this weaker conjecture computationally. I've used the graph language mostly because it was convenient and because I think a good implementation in C++ of a check of this conjecture will need to use a graph structure to be efficient.
